## MATERIALS & METHODS

### Bacterial strains and growth conditions

HJ will summarize here.

### Flow cell

All experiments were conducted in a home-made flow cell as is shown in
Fig. 3A. This flow cell has two inlets which allow media of different
osmolarity to be exchanged over the course of the experiment. The
imaging region is approximately 10 mm wide and 100 $\mu$m in depth. All
imaging took place within 1 – 2 cm of the outlet to avoid imaging cells
within a non-uniform gradient of osmolarity. The interior of the flow
cell was functionalized with a 1:400 dilution of polyethylamine prior to
addition of cells with the excess washed away with water. A dilute cell
suspension in LB Miller with 500 mM NaCl was loaded into one inlet while
the other was connected to a vial of LB medium with no NaCl. This
hypotonic medium was clamped during the loading of the cells.

Once the cells had adhered to the polyethylamine coated surface, the
excess cells were washed away with the 500 mM NaCl growth medium
followed by a small (\~20 $\mu$L) air bubble. This air bubble forced the
cells to lay flat against the imaging surface, improving the time-lapse
imaging. Over the observation period, cells not exposed to an osmotic
shock were able to grow for 4 – 6 divisions, showing that the flow cell
does not directly impede cell growth.

### Imaging conditions

All imaging was performed in a flow cell held at 30°C on a Nikon
Ti-Eclipse microscope outfitted with a Perfect Focus system enclosed in
a Haison environmental chamber (approximately 1°C regulation
efficiency). The microscope was equipped with a 488 nm laser excitation
source (CrystaLaser) and a 520/35 laser optimized filter set (Semrock).
The images were collected on an Andor Xion +897 EMCCD camera and all
microscope and acquisition operations were controlled via the open
source $\mu$Manager microscope control software (27). Once cells were
securely mounted onto the surface of the glass coverslip, between 15 and
20 positions containing 5 to 10 cells were marked and the coordinates
recorded. At each position, a phase contrast and GFP fluorescence image
was acquired for segmentation and subsequent measurement of channel copy
number. To perform the shock, LB media containing no NaCl but
supplemented with 1$\mu$M CaCl~2~ was pulled into the flow cell through a
syringe pump. To monitor the media exchange, both the high salt and no
salt LB media were supplemented with a low-affinity version of the
calcium-sensitive dye Rhod-2(250 nM; TEF Labs) which fluoresces when
bound to Ca^2+^. The no salt medium was also supplemented with 1$\mu$M
CaCl~2~ to make the media mildly fluorescent and the rate of exchange
rate was calculated by measuring the fluorescence increase across an
illuminated section of one of the positions generated by a slit mask to
avoid photobleaching damage to the cells at that position. These images
were collected in real time for the duration of the shock. The
difference in measured fluorescence between the pre-shock images and
those at the end of the shock set the scale of a 500 mM NaCl down shock.
The rate was calculated by fitting a line to the middle region of this
trace. Further details regarding this procedure can be found in
Bialecka-Fornal, Lee, and Phillips, 2015 (5).

### Image Processing

Images were processed using a combination of automated and manual
methods. First, expression of MscL was measured via segmenting
individual cells or small clusters of cells in phase contrast and
computing the mean pixel value of the fluorescence image for each
segmented object. The fluorescence images were passed through several
filtering operations which reduced high-frequency noise as well as
corrected for uneven illumination of the excitation wavelength.

Survival or death classification was performed manually using the
CellProfiler plugin for ImageJ software (NIH). A survivor was defined as
a cell which was able to undergo two division events after the osmotic
down shock. Cells which detached from the surface during the post-shock
growth phase or those which became indistinguishable from other cells
due to clustering were not counted as survival or death and were removed
from the dataset completely. A region of the cell was manually marked
with 1.0 (survival) or 0.0 (death) by clicking on the image. The xy
coordinates of the click as well as the assigned value were saved as an
.xml file for that position.

The connection between the segmented cells and their corresponding
manual markers was automated. As the manual markings were made on the
first phase contrast image after the osmotic shock, small shifts in the
positions of the cell made one-to-one mapping with the segmentation mask
non-trivial The linkages between segmented cell and manual marker were
made by computing all pairwise distances between the manual marker and
the cell centroid, taking the shortest distance as the true pairing. The
linkages were then inspected manually and incorrect mappings were
corrected as necessary.

All relevant statistics about the segmented objects as well as the
sample identity, date of acquisition, osmotic shock rate, and camera
exposure time were saved as csv files for each individual experiment. A
more in-depth description of the segmentation procedure as well as the
relevant code can be accessed as a Jupyter Notebook at
(http://rpgroup.caltech.edu/mscl\_survival).

### Logistic Regression

We used Bayesian inferential methods to find the most probable values of
the coefficients and the appropriate credible regions and is described
in detail in the supplement. Briefly, we used Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) to sample from the log posterior distribution and took the most
probable value as the mean of the samples for each parameter. The MCMC
was performed using the Stan probabilistic programming language (28) and
all models can be found on the GitHub repository
(http://github.com/rpgroup-pboc/mscl\_survival).

### Data and Software Availability

All raw image data is freely available and is stored on the CaltechDATA
Research Data Repository accessible through (DOI). All processed
experimental data, Python, and Stan code used in this work are freely
available through our GitHub repository
(http://github.com/rpgroup-pboc/mscl\_survival). The scientific
community is invited to fork our repository and open constructive
issues.

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Maja Bialecka-Fornal, Nathan Belliveau, Justin Bois, Soichi
Hirokawa, Jaspar Landman, Manuel Razo-Mejia, Muir Morrison, and Shyam
Saladi for useful advice and discussions. This work was supported by the
National Institutes of Health DP1 OD000217 (Director’s Pioneer Award),
R01 GM085286, GM084211-A1 , and GM118043-01.

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION

H.J.L and R.P. laid the groundwork for the project. H.J.L performed
experiments. G.C. performed the data analysis and made the figures.
G.C., H.J.L, and R.P. wrote the paper.

## REFERENCES
