---
indent: false
---

# Connecting the dots between mechanosensitive channel abundance, osmotic shock, and survival at single-cell resolution  

Griffin Chure$^{a, \dagger}$, Heun Jin Lee$^{b, \dagger}$, Akiko Rasmussen$^c$, and Rob Phillips$^{a,\ b,\ *}$

$^a$ Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA

$^b$ Department of Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, USA

$^c$ School of Medicine, Medical Sciences and Nutrition, Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Foresterhill, Aberdeen AB25 2ZD United Kingdom
 
$\dagger$ contributed equally

**Running title:** MscL copy number and cell survival after osmotic shock

\* Send correspondence to `phillips@pboc.caltech.edu`

## Abstract
Rapid changes in extracellular osmolarity are one of many insults microbial
cells face on a daily basis. To protect against such shocks,
*Escherichia coli* and other microbes express several types of transmembrane
channels which open and close in response to changes in membrane tension. In
*E. coli*, one of the most abundant channels is the mechanosensitive
channel of large conductance (MscL). While this channel has been heavily
characterized through structural methods, electrophysiology, and theoretical
modeling, our understanding of its physiological role in preventing cell
death by alleviating high membrane tension remains tenuous. In this work, we
examine the contribution of MscL alone to cell survival after osmotic shock
at single cell resolution using quantitative fluorescence microscopy. We
conduct these experiments in an *E. coli* strain which is lacking all
mechanosensitive channel genes save for MscL whose expression is tuned across
three orders of magnitude through modifications of the Shine-Dalgarno
sequence. While theoretical models suggest that only a few MscL channels
would be needed to alleviate even large changes in osmotic pressure, we find
that between 500 and 700 channels per cell are needed to convey upwards of
80% survival. This number agrees with the average MscL copy number measured
in wild-type *E. coli* cells through proteomic studies and quantitative
Western blotting. Furthermore, we observe zero survival events in cells with
less than 100 channels per cell. This work opens new questions concerning the
contribution of other mechanosensitive channels to survival as well as
regulation of their activity.

## Importance
Mechanosensitive (MS) channels are transmembrane protein complexes which open
and close in response to changes in membrane tension as a result of osmotic
shock. Despite extensive biophysical characterization, the contribution of
these channels to cell survival remains largely unknown. In this work, we use
quantitative video microscopy to measure the abundance of a single species of
MS channel in single cells followed by their survival after a large osmotic
shock. We observe total death of the population with less than 100 channels
per cell and determine that approximately 500 - 700 channels are needed for 80% survival.
The number of channels we find to confer nearly full survival is consistent
with the counts of the number of channels in wild type cells in several
earlier studies. These results prompt further studies to dissect the
contribution of other channel species to survival.